---
layout: post
title: "Untethering oneself" 
date: 2026-01-23 00:00:00 +0000 
categories: [Lifestyle] 
tags: [] 
image: 'assets/images/trees.jpg'
toc: true
comments: false
---

Writing is something that I enjoy doing, but, like many things that bring joy, I often need to dig deep to find the motivation to write when I don't feel like it. This morning was one of those mornings, where I could't quite think of what to write about. So I turned to look at my bookshelf for some inspiration - like I often do when this is the case. I'm still planning on writing the final post in the series of posts reflecting on the book *Can the Mind be Quiet?* by Krishnamurti, but in flicking through the pages that I'd turned the corners of - something I do with all books if there's something valuable on the page - I realised that I'd need to re-read the last section on Meditation before writing about it. This is just how it is sometimes. Ideas take time to sink in and to be synthesised and translated into writing. However, sat next to Krishnamurti's book, I noticed the *The Untethered Soul* by Michael A. Singer, and decided that I'd dig back into it to share some of the things I learned from it. 

When I read this book a couple of months ago, I remember it having a strong impact on me. There is a lot of depth and truth contained in its pages that I believe is incredibly valuable. My inclination to pick this book up again to write about it is also perhaps guided by my present state. I've started to feel as if my soul is becoming tethered and captive to my melodrama and mind-projections - losing my ability to focus, the joy in the little things, and the appreciation of the preciousness of every moment. I hope that re-reading some passages from this book will help kick some of these impurities out of me, and at the same time, perhaps my writing, inspired by Singer's, will help whoever is reading this post too.

# Our inner voice
Backtracking a little bit, the first time I heard about this book was whilst watching a YouTube video on a great channel called Strength Side. It was a morning mobility and meditation routine - one that I really enjoyed the simplicity and effectiveness of. At the beginning of the video, the guy reads a passage from a book - it happened to be this one. He finishes with the following: *"True personal growth is about transcending the part of you that is not okay and needs protection. This is done by constantly remembering that you are the one inside that notices the voice talking. That is the way out. The one inside who is aware that you are always talking to yourself about yourself is always silent. It is a doorway to the depths of your being. To be aware that you are watching the voice talk is to stand on the threshold of a fantastic inner journey. If used properly, the same mental voice that has been a source of worry, distraction, and general neurosis can become the launching ground for true spiritual awakening. Come to know the one who watches the voice, and you will come to know one of the great mysteries of creation."*

I remember when I first heard this passage. It resonated with me. Over time, I've realised more and more that much of the difficulties and turmoil that we experience is a result of internal conflict. Of the mind getting caught up in it's own little world, losing perspective of things, and not being aware that it is the *how* and not the *what* that determines one's level of peace. 

Transcendence is an interesting thing. It can be viewed as viewed as taking what is good in you and making it better or, more broadly, as an experience that goes beyond normal limits. In this case, the limit is our own psyche, which creates a constant battle with the inner voice, constraining and constructing one's beliefs to protect oneself from facing the *truth*. To go beyond our limits, therefore, requires that we dissociate our inner voice from reality. They are two separate things. This seems to undermine the philosophical statement, *"I think, therefore I am"*, by René Descartes. However, I think that this statement is in fact false. For we *aren't* our thoughts. It may seem like this if we are always caught in our unconscious thought patterns and their superficiality. However, in reality, we can choose to be an observer, residing in the seat of the depths of our consciousness. Notice how Singer nor I are saying that we should silence this inner voice. This is an almost impossible task in the Western world - at least without devotion and discipline towards a meditation practice, after which one may experience true inner silence. Instead, it's about realising that you are not your voice - choosing to watch it without judgement, from a place of equanimity. 

If you're quite confused now, don't worry. I was when I first listened to this passage and I still very much only understand this matter at the intellectual level, not the experiential. But, if your anything like me, the possibility of removing some of the baggage of our incessant internal chatter seems rather appealing. And if you also have an interest in spirituality, like I do, then the possibility of this being a tool to *"true spiritual awakening"* is exciting. So, there I was, just before doing some mobility exercises, gaining a slight hint of the fact that maybe *I* am the problem all along, for I realise, not for the first time, that it is far less about the external than the internal. And, if this is in fact the case, who wouldn't want to start taking steps on a *"fantastic inner journey"* that will allow them to understand one of the *"great mysteries of creation"*? I certainly would. 

So, roll on a few months, maybe even a couple of years, I decided that I'd pick up this book. It had also been listed as a suggestion on a website including good books about spirituality, so I thought I'd give it a read. Before the passage quoted above, Singer points us towards the voice inside our head - that is the inner voice. The one that may begin commenting on someone who's being loud on the train as follows: "Why do they need to be so loud? How dare them think that they have the right to talk so loudly on the train. And what they're talking about is not even important either. How selfish can some people be." I'm sure that you're all familiar with this voice. It's the voice that acts from our unconscious mind. One that, unless tamed, can overwhelm us and lead us to losing control - in this case, it may be that you tell the people to "shut up", or, perhaps even worse, prolonged conflict may occur inside your mind. Such situations are cases where our internal voice acts to try to conform the outside world to the conditioning of our psyche. Trying to create a semblance of control, which is in fact simply an illusion. This allows us to distort the reality to fit our views, beliefs, and opinions. It's this same inner voice that Singer encourages us to become *observers* of. However, he notes that this will make us *"feel more open and exposed"*, as I guess, in essence, we've now removed the previous filtering and distortion that our unconscious mind was performing. However, I believe that, as we'll see later on, that this is a necessary step in freeing oneself from the shackles of one's mind. For it opens up an infinite expansiveness that is otherwise unaccessible, and frees up a tremendous amount of energy to *actually* experience life, as it is. 

Most of what our internal voice says is completely meaningless. This is the truth. What's also true is that most of our life will unfold according to forces far outside of our control. Therefore, if one realises that our inner voice merely creates an illusion, a *semblance* of control and comfort, then we are able to live more *fully*, with the knowledge that life is simply a collection of experiences, there for us to experience. This is not to say to live life with complete passivity, however, it builds a strong case for going with the flow, at least at a high level, as our *thoughts* have far less of an impact on the outside world than we think. Therefore, why not choose to view things in a good light? It would certainly free us from much pain and despair. I can't even begin to think about how often    I get caught up in my own internal dialogue about small, insignificant matters. I imagine that I'm not the only one, either. 

# The unwelcome flatmate 
Now that I've touched on the concept of this inner voice, what exactly is it and how has it arrived where it has, incessantly commenting on all that is happening externally? To understand this, we must become familiar with the concept of the psyche. The psyche is often called the soul or the mind. However, I believe that there's a clear distinction and possible separation between them, so long as one isn't simply caught up in one's mind. Why do I say this? Because I believe that the soul lies and stems from the spiritual heart. Not the heart in the physical sense, but the heart that guides us through life - the one which experiences and knows the truth. It's the centre of our spiritual selves, if you like. But it's infinite potential is often highly untapped, for we are caught up in our minds. More precisely, we're captivated in the prison of our *psyche*, in which we are unaware that we're imprisoned. 

The psyche is the root of the "neurotic burst of conflicting dialogue" that we constantly experience. A simple example is me this morning. Instead of sitting to eat my breakfast and *only* eat my breakfast - with full presence of the food that is on my spoon, the flavours and the textures when chewing - my internal voice was thinking about other things. About whether I have the right tent for a camping trip that I'm going on, or what I'll write a blog post about. But this chatter is completely pointless and a huge wastage of energy. More seriously, it meant that I did not appreciate my food, dulling an experience that has the potential to bring so much internal joy. 

So, where do these thoughts originate from? Past experiences and thoughts that reside in our psyche. What's the psyche? It's this 'box' if you like, that we've constructed over the years to fit our views and beliefs. Consequently, it itself is simply a collection of thoughts and experiences that create the floor, roof, and walls of this prison that is our psyche. The uncomfortable truth is that by allowing the internal voice residing in our psyche to predominate our lives, we will always project our fears and insecurities onto others, or something else - ignoring the fact that the source of *trouble* is in fact this unwelcome flatmate that is our psyche. This is what causes much of the suffering in our life, but it needn't be there. 

So, how does one tell this unwelcome flatmate that we'd like them to kindly leave? Well, Singer states that if we want to kick it out, we really have to want to do so. No half hearted attempts here. And for us to arrive at the point where it is even slightly possible to kick it out, we need to have spent quite some time with is. Observing it's workings, it's operation, and the evolution of our own mental melodrama. Only then will we have a basis for using practices to help us free ourselves from the captivity of our minds. Then we can begin freeing ourselves from ourselves, noticing that distance is required between ourselves and our psyche. Just like Sri Chimnoy says, once we've reached the point where we wish to fully commit to the inner work of freedom, we must do so without turning back. The choice to do so must come from a place of purity and clarity, so we must be careful not to make this choice if we're still caught up in a battle with our psyche. But, once we make the choice, it will certainly be worth it. For this will allow us to reclaim our life. The only life that we have.

# Who am I?
Singer touches on one fascinating, yet important point that must be understood before we can begin to progress along this spiritual path. 