---
title: "Reflections from a small caravan"
date: 2025-06-16 00:00:00 +0000
categories: [Lifestyle]
tags: [simplicity]
---

It's been a couple of months since I last wrote a blog post. Things have been busy and challenging for me, but I am trying to take small steps in the right direction. This post will be brief, but, hopefully, a powerful reflection on my time living off the grid in a tiny caravan in late January this year. If anything, it will be a nice thing to look back at in the future. 

It was the 20th of January, 2025, when I arrived in a small Portugese village to stay with a lovely English-Dutch family who were living off the grid with three girls. I hopped off the bus and waited in the rain for my lift to the off-grid 'finca'. The difference in the weather between the south - where I had previously been staying for two weeks - and the north was stark. The mountains of the north were far damper and green, not too disimilar to North Wales! It was raining quite heavily when I arrived, so I decided to try to shelter outside a local cafe. Whilst waiting for a lift, I thought I would try something from the cafe, but I had stupidly not taken out any cash before coming on my trip, and the cafe did not accept card. Oh well! I soaked in the culture instead, noticing how different it was to back home. 

Soon after, I was greeted by my host in the coolest old VW van and taken to their homestead. On the way, we stopped off at the local community centre to pick up the girls from their theatre class. For some reason, I was somewhat surprised, perhaps not expecting there to be a theatre class in such a rural place. However, this soon made me realise that lots of small, rural communities have a close-knit sense of community. This is almost  a neccesity as, unlike modern 'city life', there are more times where locals need each others' support. 

After their class finished, the three girls hopped into the van and we made our way up the valley to their off-grid home. We shared some fresh oranges, picked from their friends' orange trees, and talked a little about our lives up to now. I noticed how different these oranges tasted to the oranges back home. No pesticides nor wax coatings nor strange E numbers - and you could tell. They were the best oranges that I'd ever tasted! We continued to wind up the small mountain lanes until we passed through their closest village before turning down a dirt road to their finca. It was dark by now, so I'd be lying if I said I wasn't a little nervous about heading down a bumpy road with four people who were strangers just a couple of hours before. 

We arrived at their house and I was impressed with how cool it was! One of the hosts was a carpenter, and he had designed the house himself before bulding it with the help of some friends. It was painted with some eco-friendly green paint, which made it look like some sort of cool spaceship dome type thing. Inside, it had a mezanine level with one bedroom, and the children's bedroom was downstairs. Then there was an opened planned kitchen, dinner, living room, with a (yet to be finished) bathroom around the back. Despite being small on the outside, it felt plenty spacious inside and the space felt warm and cosy, being easily heated up by the big thrifted log-burner that they had in the centre of the living room. We talked about life for a while after dinner and I learnt a lot about the family before they showed me where I would be staying during my time there. We walked to the bottom of the land, where a small, old French caravan was parked. This would be my home. 

The caravan was cool - like *really* cool! When I was younger, I became a little obsessed with tiny houses and campervan conversions, so there has always been a part of me that wants to live off the grid in a small house. It was exciting to be able to do that for a little bit. The caravan was small - smaller than modern ones. But it also had everything that you could need. There was a double bed, a sofa with a small bookshelf, a small log burner to keep it warm, a kitchen with a stovetop, and even a toilet room. However, they'd decided to get rid of the toilet as they had built a nice, palace looking, compost toilet not far from the caravan. I was tired from a long day travelling, so I held off the urge to start a fire in the log burner and spent the night reading me book. 

Since arriving in Portugal a couple of weeks prior, I'd decided not to purchase a sim card. Initially, this was because I was intending on staying at the place I was before for longer, however, I later decided that I would carry on without one almost as an 'experiment' - to experience life without almost constant access to the internet for once! I've been interested in technology use for a few years now and I often like to try to think back what it may have been like before smartphones and mobile networks were a thing. I saw this as a good opportunity to test it out a little. This is the first thing that I'd like to reflect on. 

## Disconnecting to reconnect 

All in all, I was in Portugal for just under a month and, for this time, I did not have a sim card. This meant that the only time I was *connected* online was when I managed to find some WiFi at a shop or wherever I was staying. For some time now, I have been wrestling with mindful technology use and swing back and forth between thinking that it is highly destructive, to thinking that the benefits perhaps far outweigh the negatives. But, on the whole, I always come back to the same conclusion: being constantly connected, with what would used to have been considered a *supercomputer* merely a few decades ago, is not good. Time and time again, I've noticed how experiences feel far more meaningful when not checking my phone every now and then. And I wouldn't say that I'm at all addictive to my phone, it's just that it's presence plays with one's subconcious. The fact that it *is* there and that there *is* the *option* to look at it whenever one wants some sort of dopamine release certainly takes away from more meaningful experiences. 

I've not been on social media (other than Strava!)for a good few years or so now, so when I do go on my phone, I either end up looking through Strava or searching some random things on the internet that I feel like I need to know about. Naturally, this means that my phone is far less addicitve and inticing than it used to be, but it does also mean that, so long as there is internet, I can still indefinitely spend time scrolling on it. So the problem still remains - the phone can be used to fill in those 'voids' that appear throughout my day. Having no sim card in Portugal meant that my phone became far less appealing as it was far easier to ask a local where the nearest shop or cafe was than to try to find some WiFi in the middle of nowhere. 

When I arrived at the off-grid farm, I'd already spent a good two weeks far more offline than I usually was. The WiFi at the previous place wasn't great and you could only connect to it if you were very close to the router. This, coupled with my desire to be more disconnected online, meant that I probably only spent no more than half an hour a day on my phone during those two weeks. At the finca, the caravan had no WiFi at all, so now I had no choice but to send my time doing other, more meaningful things. At first, it was difficult. The solitude, combined with the confined feeling in the small caravan meant that I felt a little alone. I guess I felt as if I had too much time to think. But, upon reflection, it's these moments of solitude and peace that allow you to properly reflect on both yourself and other things. 

The caravan had a guitar, so I spent some time playing some songs and also trying to make up my own songs. It almost seemed far easier to express creativity when a key inhibitor - that is the smartphone - is removed. I spent a lot of time reading too and began to appreciate the fun of reading a good book once again. But more than anything, I tried to spend as much time during the day outside. Time walking around the local area, playing on the trampoline with the girls, doing some work in the garden, and taking the dogs for walks. Someone used to the plethora of things to do in a big city may feel like there is nothing to do in an off-grid farm, but I found that it was in fact quite the opposite. You see, when immersed in nature, living with it, not removed from it, there are naturally so many things to do with your time.

In a sense, living off the grid with this lovely family really drove it home to me that, to reconnect with others and with nature - the things that truly matter - one should disconnect a little more with the online world. When there is no TV to suck you into watching Netflix, no phone to suck you into endless scrolling, and no laptop to pretend to be working, then time passes by differently. We felt no rush to cook nor eat and, instead, cherished these moments of connection and tried to show appreciation and gratitude for simply being alive and in the presence of others. 

## At the surface, life is simple 

When living off the grid, you gain an appreciation for the things that are important in life. At the surface, life is simple. But that is not to say that life is *easy* - these are two different things. When living off the grid, things that we usually take for granted need to be taken into greater consideration e.g. like making sure that you fill up on enough water from the local well or ensuring that your solar system is working so that you can fill up on some juice to allow you to power your home. But everything felt far simpler, perhaps primitive, than back at home. Because gas is a finite resource, it needed to be used wisely. This meant that when using the gas heated shower, one was more mindful of how long they spent showering. Because the food shop was not just around the corner, one had to be mindful of one's food consumption and know how to grow food on the land to sustain a family.

During my stay, a couple of thing surfaced as being important in life. The first was food. We need to eat in order to fuel ourselves, and I gained an appreciation whilst staying here for food. But food's importance extends wider than this - it is a way of bringing people together, of connecting. Every lunchtime and evening, we would meet in the family's kitchen to eat dinner, taking it in turns to help with the cooking or cleaning. Such a simple act, like eating, is often neglected back at home. Why do I say this? We no longer respect the cultural significance or importance of eating a meal around a table, together. Fast, convenient foods and wide spread entertainment services mean that we often eat on a sofa, alone, or even when driving. This removes a key part of eating: the social side. I've always been a firm believer in eating around a table, even if I'm alone, and I am glad of this. Even when alone, it helps me to better appreciate my food - the flavours, textures and colors involved - and not simply hoover it up. However, when able to, eating with others around a table is something that few things can top. Around a handmade wooden table in the spaceship off-grid dome, we shared many laughs and stories together and connected far more than we otherwise would have. In a sense, food is, and always has been, a way of connecting and sharing life stories.

Aside from food, I also cam to appreciate the importance of shelter. I am privelleged enough to have never not had a roof to live under, but I realie that this is not the case for everyone. 

Something about the fire in the caravan and the bed to sleep on etc. 

## Community is key 

## Solitude sucks. Or does it? 

## Be more childlike 
